I've been watching the political trends on my favorite news aggregator, Hacker News, and I've decided to write about what I've noticed recently. 

Hacker News has a reasonably mature debate on political issues, in that they tend to listen and argue with eachother without getting too sidetracked. Sometimes the main trends are quite crystalized in a few highly-upvoted posts. The posters are mainly software entrepreneurs or wannabe entrepreneurs, so they typically rationalize their economic interest in growth and financial success. There are some individuals in the community who have gained their respect through startup success, such as Paul Graham and Elon Musk. These people are, loosely, role models to the community. The result of the community's self-selection is a strong libertarian (that's right-libertarian, for any non-Americans) trend, with a significant interest in charity and social good. 

Recently, I have noticed a trend on HN (as well as on reddit) of understanding some of the problems in the world in a more systemic manner. The idea that there are some "bad apples" in the political sphere is no longer the dominant ideology. Now the most upvoted comments talk about selection. Here's an example: "... Psychopaths are so good at lying that they self-deceive themselves. They believe their own lies. That's why it's so easy to fall for what they say. They always fly to the top - be it at corporations, governments, crime organizations. The more psychopathic they are, the higher they get."

In other words, the present understanding is that our democratic systems select for psychopathic behavior. This is an interesting and encouraging shift, and I think it is caused by an overabundance of "bad apple" stories in the internet media. It's hard to hold on to the belief that we got unlucky with a politician or two, when it seems to be nearly every one of them. 

However, I don't think it's a complete or thorough understanding. While it's definitely true that our social structures allow for psychopathy to rise upwards, it is not true that this is the only mechanism. The other important mechanism is that our social environment conditions and trains our ideas. The United States president is surrounded, every day, by members of the ruling class. He talks to other politicians, military officials, lobbyists, expert economists, and so on. His daily work, his economic and social interests, and his hopes and fears are so totally different from what you and I experience. The president was just one example, very similar conditions exist in the lives of most politicians.

A materialist sees social forces and recognizes their effect on the mind. An idealist believes the mind operates alone, as if by cosmic will.