This is an intro to Marx's analysis of capitalism. 

Before starting, it's worth noting that the entirety of Capital vol.1 assumes competitive markets. Marx did this to show the problems ("contradictions") capitalism faces even in ideal initial conditions. Now then, from the top!

A commodity is a product that can be exchanged on the market: Bread, a car, or some amount of steel.

A commodity has "use value", meaning its usefulness. Bread's use value is the fact that you eat it. Cars are a means of transportation. Steel is useful in that you can make something out of it.

A commodity also has "exchange value", meaning its value on the market. Five thousand loaves of bread exchange for a car, a loaf of bread exchanges for 10 pounds of steel, or, when you abstract these relationships into *money*, a loaf of bread exchanges for a dollar. 

Commodities are created in a process of production.
This process takes as inputs: the means of production, and labor. The process produces: the commodity.
The "means of production" refers to raw material (steel for making cars), machines (assembly robots), and tools (hammers).
Labor refers to workers - specifically the workers' time.

Value, in Marxist theory, refers to "socially necessary labor time (SNLT)." It is the number of hours (that are necessary in present society[1]) a laborer works to produce a commodity. Generally the price of a commodity should match its value, at least in the long-run. The point, here, of coming up with a theory of value is to identify the source of profits. Bread is cheap because it doesn't take much labor time to make. Cars are expensive because they take a lot of labor time to make. The SNLT of an end-user commodity *includes* the labor time required to build and maintain the machines as well as the SNLT of procuring the raw materials. 

In Marx's theory, then, labor creates value. It is the sole creator of value. Every commodity's value should be traceable to a sort of "tree" of laborers, whether in the factory making the cars, the factory making the robots, the laboratory making the grease for the robots, or the coal miners all the way down at some leaf of the tree. 

Labor creates value, but does not require as much value to persist as it creates. Labor time may be worth $10/hr, but I may only require $30 a day to survive (food,rent,etc). A firm may pay $300 for labor, and get $800 of value (in commodities) out of the investment. Surplus value is the term for the difference between what you pay a worker and what value she produces. Firms realize surplus value in the form of profit. Firms must attempt to maximize surplus value or go out of business (more on this in a sec).

One problem appears here. It requires the same wage for a laborer to survive regardless of how many hours she works. Thus, increasing the number of work hours for the same pay is incentivized. And of course, this is what happened during the industrial revolution. In reaction, labor struggles brought about the 12-hour work day, then the 10-hour work day, and eventually the 8-hour. Now, this wouldn't be a problem if the labor market at all resembled a competitive market (employers would be in competition with eachother for the laborers, workers could pick how many hours they worked, etc.) Commodity markets don't resemble labor markets because commodities do not create value, they merely have value - "stored value" as Marx says.

Firms must extract as much surplus value as they can. They are compelled to, because much of that profit/surplus value is reinvested in more capital. The strongest force here is that of technology. Firms must invest in new and better technologies or risk falling behind the competition. Interestingly, since technology causes less labor time to be required per commodity, jobs will be lost and the supply of the "reserve army of labor" (the unemployed) increases. Another possibility is that new markets will be found/created to increase the demand for a higher supply of commodities from the same number of laborers. New markets are often *created* by advertising (diamond engagement rings are a great example.) New markets are *found* through aggressive globalization. Simply put, if there exists a way to invest in the demise of your competition, firms must do it. 

A second problem is then pretty simple: Not every method of getting ahead is socially positive. This isn't Marx; he makes very few moral judgements in his theory. This is just how I see it. A brief list of negative things that occur resulting from the compulsions of markets: Unsustainable carbon emissions, destruction of the rainforests, overfishing/overhunting, oppression of workers, perpetuation of racism/sexism/and other tools for dividing the working class, occupation and destruction of indiginous lands for resources, corporate media that chases ratings above all else, and so on. 

Some of these manifest as decisions that a single person or a group of people in a firm make at a particular time. For instance, someone at some point decides to open up new coal-burning plants to support the growth of their industrial operation.

Others are more subtle, and manifest through selection and bias. For instance, if you are a wealthy individual who owns businesses, the people you are surrounded by all day tend to have the same values you do. Those values and ideas are informed by what strategies and worldviews made it to the top. Being hard-line and brutally effective against labor unions was the sort of personality that shot up the corporate ladder in the early 1900s in America. Dick Cheney can probably justify (to himself and to people he is surrounded by) any war he can think up, because of how invested he personally is in the military-industrial complex.

I point out these manifestations to show that there is no grand conspiracy, merely the interactions of forces and the relations between people and the means of production. Politicians and capitalists are not steeped in the culture of the working class, and it seems clear that their worldview primarily rationalizes their own personal interests. 

Another quick thing: Understanding the impact of ruling-class culture and worldview should be straightforward if you're familiar with institutionlized racism or modern feminism. The "invisibility" of privilege in those theories explains also the difficulty of perceiving the economic/political status quo and the forces which drive it. In feudal society, the serf would spend a certain number of days in a year working for free for his lord, and the rest of the days working for himself. The exploitation was obvious in its form. Capitalism hides this in the wage system. 

[1] For example, it may require five hours to make a shirt out of some cotton, thread, and a needle. After the sewing machine comes into existence, it now takes only one hour. The value of the shirt has dropped to (a bit more than) a fifth because it now takes a fifth of the time. It's a bit more because of the SNLT that went into the machine. If you're still making shirts without a sewing machine, you are wasting hours, and you probably will cease to exist on the competitive market. You will also cease to exist on the market if you make commodities nobody wants. Those points should explain the difference between "labor time" and "socially necessary labor time".