These are some Marxist critiques of Liberalism which I personally find pretty convincing.

In my opinion, the most important problem that liberal thought has is idealism. Idealism is a broad set of concepts, but is generally the belief that the world is built on ideas, and the best ideas win out and are subsequently materialized. Politicians, for example, love speaking idealistically. They tend to claim or imply that experts and policy makers all sit in a room together and figure out the best plan, regardless of politics! At their most cynical, they will admit that there exists a bit of a struggle between Republicans and Democrats, but they will reach "across the aisle" to find "non-partisan" solutions to problems.

Marxists argue that the struggle between professional politicians in the democratic party and professional politicians in the republican party does not approach the scale of the real struggles in society. Struggle in society occurs when fundamental interests do not align. Marxists argue that the most fundamental interests in society relate to how you spend your working time, how you get food and shelter, the nature of your social life, how much free time you have to pursue your interests, etc. In capitalism this means your relationship to the means of production. A worker's interests relate to selling his labor power to a capitalist so he can buy food, pay rent, and so on. A capitalist's interests relate to maximizing profit and surviving against the competition. There is much nuance in this struggle in modern society, but the abstraction of class struggle is a very useful one. 

Class struggle as the primary engine of change is one of the basic ideas of a materialist worldview. There's a semi-famous quote by Engels, "*all* past history was the history of class struggles; that these warring classes of society are always the products of the modes of production and of exchange." I do find this to be slightly reductionist, but class analysis of history is often enlightening. It is certainly more convincing than the idealist "great man" theories of history which we were taught in school. 

Class struggle explains why fighting capitalists with theories and ideas is not *actually* effective, and strikes are. Strikes stop production, which can severely hurt a business. The message of a strike may be "higher wages" or "shorter hours", but the medium for this message is the capitalist's bottom line.


Another piece of idealism is the concept of negative freedoms or negative liberty. Our constitution guarantees freedom of speech and of the press, for instance.
The claim: Anyone can print whatever they want in the press!
The implication: In our great country, you can say what you want and we'll fight for your right to say it, even if we respectfully disagree.Reality: If you own a press, the government will not put you in jail for something you write in it. There is no attempt to level the playing field of public discourse, so a handful of media outlets (owned by a smaller handful of parent companies) frame and control all national debates and topics of interest. 

Positive freedom, on the other hand, refers to granting the power to make a certain freedom possible. For instance, one might propose "freedom from oppressive speech." Realistically, this strips negative freedom of speech from oppressors.

Negative freedoms are useful, particularly as heuristics, but it's important to note that *any* negative freedom favors the ruling class. The ruling class is more likely able to actually exercize the freedom to own 8 homes or spread nationalist propaganda on television.
